Welcome to this course on LaTeX for Students, Engineers and Scientists.
I am Firuza Karmali, one of the course instructors.
So we will look at the following things in this session-
what is LaTeX, when and why people use it, what can you do in LaTeX,
and we will show some sample documents which have been created using LaTeX.
So let's get an overview. LaTeX was written by Leslie Lamport in the early 1980s.
LaTeX is a document preparation system which is released under LaTeX Project Public License.
So you can consider, it is an alternative to an editing software like Microsoft Word, Libre Writer.
If you want more information about the LaTeX project, please visit the website: www.latex-project.org.
So what is not LaTeX? LaTeX is not WYSIWYG. WYSIWYG is- what you see is what you get.
So a writer just writes some basic simple markup commands for formatting.
He just concentrates on the content and not on the formatting
and you can write complex mathematical formulas with ease.
So what can be done? One can write articles, books, journals, papers, posters, banners, you name it and you can write it.
So why it is so easy that people use it? Now consider that a person is writing a book.
So while a person writes a book, it is a practise to start a chapter from the odd page
and not from the even page.
So in a normal text editor, one needs to manually set this for each chapter.
What if a person writes more content in the previous chapters? The chapters would get shifted.
But LaTeX does this for you, automatically. You write a chapter, it will always begin from an odd page.
So now let's come to process of writing. So just choose your favourite text editor,
write the commands, save it as a .tex file.
We build it by running this command 'pdflatex (Your file name).tex'
or there are build options right from the LaTeX IDEs, and which will generate a pdf file.
Now let us see some sample documents. This was a manual created for one of our programming courses
in 2014, which was done in LaTeX.
If you see, this title page is so well typeset. It's centred, some of the titles are bold,
there is a logo, it's equally spaced, you can see something else, there is a hyperlink,
there are page numbers, these are the table of contents.
I can click on this particular section which I want to go to,
I have list of figures which we have used,
I have list of tables, there are some sections, subsections,
these are enumerate points, tables, figures.
If you see this particular page number 9 is in landscape format. This is yet to be written.
Some diagrams are there. It's very well typeset if you see the margins etc., the font,
it looks uniform. People will say, "Ah, what a document".
Now let's go back and see a poster. This is also created in LaTeX using one of the classes.
If you see, there is introduction, there are diagrams, there are references, conclusion,
all of which look so neat and tidy.
Now let's see a document.
One of the objectives of this course, is to achieve a typesetting shown in this document.
So we start by writing plain text i.e. without LaTeX code and build upon it, session by session.
The enhanced article unit under each session will highlight what LaTeX commands were added to typeset the document,
and move one step closer to the final one.
This is the title page
Preface with some text colored in pink and green, some citations, cross-referencing to respective chapters and sections
A clickable Table of contents, list of tables, and list of figures.
If you see this is a chapter 1- Phenomena, which is typeset in double spacing having bullet items, hyperlinks, and a footnote.
Chapter 2 also has some citations, an image, and mathematical formulas.
Chapter 3, also has a table where some rows and columns are merged.
The Section 3.3 is typeset into two columns.
Section 3.6 is in landscape mode.
Finally coming to our bibliography and back index.
Now let us see a book which was created using LaTeX.
This book was created for one of our summer internship projects.
So this contains the list of interns, list of mentors
and it has the date, attendees, absentees, number, issue, assigned to, etc.
So, which we can maintain to record our minutes of the meetings that we used to have for our project.
So these are the things that was done.
So in this session, we learnt what is LaTeX,
we saw the different documents that can be created using LaTeX.
Thank you. Have a nice day.